Africa has highlighted the Rwanda
genocide during its case against Israel
at the international court of justice it
says the International Community failed
to prevent the atrocities from being
committed back in 1994 and warns history
should not be repeated Victoria gon
reports the genocide in Rwanda unfolded
in full view of the
world Belgian peacekeepers were tortured
and murdered on the first day of the
killings an appeal reinforcements was
denied and as the number of those killed
increased the United Nations security
Council condemned the massacres but
refused on the insistance of the US and
the UK to use the term
genocide US President Bill Clinton
admitted regret when he visited Rwanda
in
1998 we did not act quickly enough after
the killing
began we should not have allowed the
refugee camps to become safe haven for
the
[Applause]
Killers we did not immediately call
these Crimes by their rightful name
genocide a report published by Rwanda in
2021 found France bore a significant
responsibility for not stopping the
massacres despite prior knowledge they
were being planned some estimates put
the number of dead at around
800,000 France was accused of covering
up its role in even protecting some
perpetrators a French inquiry blamed the
government for not foreseeing the
slaughter and said it bore a serious and
overwhelming responsibility but it
absolved the French government of direct
complicity The Killers who stalked the
swamps the hills the churches did not
have the face of France France was not
an
accomplice South Africa has filed a case
against Israel at the international
Court of Justice accusing it of carrying
out genocide in Gaza and says history
should not be repeated Rwanda stands out
as a stem and severe rebuke to all of us
for having failed for for the
International Community having failed to
prevent it from happening let us not
have it live with the same regret when
it comes to Palestine the international
criminal Tribunal for Rwanda based in
Tanzania convicted 61 people for their
role in the killings hundreds of
thousands Mo have faced trial in
community courts in
Rwanda 30 years on many see the failings
that led to that genocide as a timely
lesson and one that's never seemed more
relevant Victoria gonb Al
jazer well Charles Petri is former
assistant Secretary General of the
United Nations and United Nations Deputy
coordinator in Rwanda during the 1994
genocide he joins us now from Aman good
to have you with us you arrived with p P
Tre in Rwanda about a month into the
genocide tell us about your role there
and the particular challenges you faced
there as a un
representative yes thank you for having
me yeah no I arrived you're right um in
May early May
94 a month into the genocide about half
of the the people who were to be
murdered were were killed um as the
deputy humanitarian coordinator my
responsibility was to try and get a
better sense of what was happening on
the ground reporting it to New York and
then also
facilitating um uh the activities of the
different humanitarian Partners the
first was actually quite challenging
because there you know we we talk about
the failure of the security Council in
Rwanda I mean one has to remember that
that the the security Council was
addressing the the genocide in Rwanda
barely four weeks after the withdrawal
of troops from Somalia for me the
failure Rwanda has paid paid the price
for the failure of Somalia of the
international operation in Som Somalia
and that that really came to a head with
the battle in Mogadishu early October
when the US the US uh Special Forces
lost I think up to 20 20 of their men
and the us another internation another
country decided that uh they weren't
going to get involved in something that
did not have a direct relevance to to
national interests so you say that the
UN Security Council deliberately failed
Rwanda do you think that the same thing
is happening today when we look at Gaza
that the UN Security Council today is
deliberately failing people there
too uh well I I would say that Rwanda
set the trend for what we've been seeing
ever since uh I think I mean Somalia was
was really the first postc Cold War
intervention and there was an attempt to
try and and sort of establish almost I
mean it's it's pretentious to say but
almost a new world order at least to get
involved in in promoting some of the
basic the the basic values and and it
failed and as a result of the failure I
think the the will of the International
Community to get involved in something
more more than direct national interests
just dissipated so the the the man that
our correspondent was talking to just
then said that the world has not learned
from the lessons of Rwanda would you
agree with
that I think the world has become almost
darwinian so it's not a question of not
learning it's it's a question of the
forces that are that are confronting
each other it's just what this new world
order looks like and it makes it
exceedingly difficult to sort of push
through basic principles in in such a
context when we talk about progress
happening in Rwanda this drive for
reconciliation we've heard a lot of
people saying that it seems somewhat
forced that it's too
politicized when you're looking at
Rwanda today are you seeing a nation
that has healed or is there still a long
way to
go I think there's I mean one doesn't
you know one doesn't heal overnight from
from such a traumatic event um I mean
look at Israel today and and how much
the the Holocaust has defined the trauma
of the Holocaust has defined the
politics and and and Society it's
exactly the same thing in Rwanda uh
there's there's a trauma there
there's I mean I'm not even sure time is
is the the the only factor that will
really help overcome that that trauma no
I I I I think it's something profound
and and uh and as a result something
exceedingly complex to understand from
the
outside as a witness to such a horrific
chapter in in human history what of it
do you carry with
you uh I would say profound
sadness uh um that I think many of us
who were there have never been able to
let go
um and and uh you know the feeling that
we were allowed to see uh what existed
behind the veil of uh of normal social
behavior you know not you know and and I
think we've seen it even more I mean
it's not specific to Rwanda specific to
Africa it's it's we've seen uh we we
were we were we were allowed to see a
dimension of of of human nature that
really exist exists and and has to be
has to be it has to be understood that
it exists and still to this day Charles
Petri we thank you very much for taking
the time to join us with your thoughts
and experiences here on Al
jaera thank you